Pivot Table
This is an advanced Pivot Tables. In a data If I press 'control+down' arrow,
that's going to jump me all the way down to the last row of my data. 
So, you can see how many rows of data I have. 
So, a fair amount of data that I want to analyze in a pivot table. 
'Control+up' arrow is going to jump me back up to the top of my data. 
What I want to do is I want to analyze this data in different ways.
Now, I have actually jumped ahead a little bit. So, this data that I have in this 
spreadsheet that I'm going to use is already what we would classify as clean.
Now, we are going to go into cleaning data when we get a little bit further into,
but suffice to say that cleaning data just means you you're starting off 
with data that's consistent and that doesn't have any anomalies. 

So, we don't have things like blank rows in our data. We don't have blank cells, 
we don't have inconsistent case, we don't have duplicates, and everything is 
formatted correctly. Now, the final step I would take here before putting this data 
into a pivot table, is that I would put this data into a regular table in Excel. 
And that's a fairly simple process. You can do it a few ways. I could choose to do 
'Ctrl+A' to highlight all of my data, and then 'Ctrl+T' which is going to allow me to
create a table. Alternatively, what I can do is I can go up to that home ribbon and I 
can go across to the styles group, the 'Format as Table' button, and I can choose 
any one of these different table formats. It's going to ask me, where is my data? 
And because I was clicked within my data, it selected everything around my selection. 
I'm going to say yes, my table does have headers, and I'm going to click on 'OK'. 
And now my data is essentially in a table. Now, how can you tell the difference between
data that's in a table and data that isn't? Because it doesn't look a great deal 
different to what it was prior to putting in the table. 

Well, there's a couple of things: The first thing is if you clicked within your data, 
if your data is in a table, you're going to see the "Table Design" context choice 
ribbon, and that is a ribbon in Excel that only appears when it's needed. 
So, whilst I'm clicked in my data, I can see I have a table design ribbon and I have all
of my options on here for formatting my table. If I was to click my mouse outside of 
that table, you'll see that ribbon disappears, and that's why it's called context 
choice; only there when we need access to it. So, if you click in your data and you
don't see that table design ribbon, then it's more than likely that your data hasn't 
been put inside a table. 

Another thing that will happen when you create a table from data is that you'll 
get these handy filter buttons listed at the top of each column. So, if I just wanted 
to filter by a specific town, I could de-select everything and maybe I'm only 
interested in the data for some specific name or part of the data, I can select those,
click on 'OK', and it's going to filter my data for me, and I now only have data 
for those particular thing. Now, I'm going to clear that filter like so to put 
everything back again. So, those are kind of two ways that you would know that your
data has been put inside a table.

Now, why is this so important when you're creating pivot tables? Well, what I'm 
going to do here is from this table design ribbon is I'm going to name my table.
And you see the first group there; it's called Properties, it says Table Name, 
and by default, Excel has given my table the name of Table1. when you are naming 
tables, or even if you're naming ranges of cells, you can't have any spaces
in between the two words. So, I couldn't have space in between name like sales data 
example Sales space Data. It needs to be one word or separated with an underscore. 

Super important point here, remember to hit 'enter' once you've named your table so 
that table name sets. So, now when I create my pivot table, everything is going
to be a lot easier for me to read; It's going to be a lot easier for me to understand. 
And if we're now pulling anything from that table, we can utilize the table name as 
opposed to the cell references of the table. 

So, now I've done that final step, I'm going to summarize my data, or analyze my data
using a pivot table.
Again, a few different ways that you can do this. The one that's probably easiest 
for me at the moment, based on the ribbon that I'm currently clicked on, 
which is the table design ribbon, is to utilize the Summarize with PivotTables option 
just here. Alternatively, if you jump to the Insert ribbon, you do have a PivotTables
button; it's the first one in that tables group. Clicking either of those is going to 
take you to exactly the same dialog box. So, now I got this box, it says, Choose the 
data that you want to analyze, and you can see that Excel has intuitively picked up
that I probably want to use the Data range. And you can see those marching ants 
around the outside, so that's showing me that it's picking up all of my data.
If I had my data saved off somewhere else and maybe in another 
Excel spreadsheet, or maybe I wanted to import it from another system or application, 
I could also choose to use an external data source.


The second thing I need to tell Excel is where I want this PivotTable report to be 
placed. Do I want it on a brand new worksheet or an existing worksheet in my workbook? 
Now one more tip here, I would always suggest that you do keep your raw data separate 
from your pivot tables. So, in this instance I always like to choose new worksheet. 
And I'm going to click on 'OK'. And what you'll see now, if you look down the bottom
of the screen, I have a brand new sheet called Sheet2. I'm going to 'right click' 
and I'm going to rename that to PivotTable.

And now, what you see, is that on the left hand side of the screen, I have my empty 
pivot table report, and on the right hand side of the screen I have this PivotTable
Fields pane. For some reason you don't see this pane, it might be that you're not 
actually clicked in the pivot table reports on the left hand side. For example, if I 
click in another cell, you can see that that pane disappears. 
So, if you can't see that, make sure you are clicked in that pivot table part.
If you still can't see it, it might be that you've accidentally closed it down, and all
you need to do to get that back is go up to your PivotTable Analyze ribbon, in the Show
group on the end, you have a 'Field List' button, click that and that little pane is 
going to pop back out again. Now, what this PivotTable pane shows you are all of the 
column headings from your raw data. So, you can see there, I have some header names 
for the column. And then underneath that, I have these four different areas, filters,
columns, rows, and values.
And the simple fact of dragging any of these fields into any of these four areas, 
that's what's going to build my PivotTable. 
Now, this sometimes is a little bit of a trial and error. It really depends the kind 
of information you're trying to extract. 
So, let's do a very basic example. Maybe I want to see all of these sales broken down by
manager. What I would do is I would grab my sales field, I'm going to drag that down
into the values area. And then I'm going to grab my 'Manager' field and I'm going to
drag that down into rows. And what you'll see on the spreadsheet is that as I dropped 
that, I now have all of the managers listed in the rows, and I can see the total sales
for each of those managers. And just to show how you can manipulate your table and get 
it to display how you want, if I was to move the manager field up into the columns area,
you're going to see a display in a slightly different way. 
So, we now have them running across in the columns and we have the sales underneath.
Now, that's not a particularly nice way of displaying this data. So, I'm going to move
manager back to rows. Now, what if I wanted to do a slightly different analysis? 
Maybe I wanted to analyze the sum of all the sales by category. Again, I can get rid 
of this manager field, simply by clicking and dragging it outside of the pivot table.
I can grab the 'Category' field and drag that down and drop it into rows. 
And now I have the sum of sales performed by category. If I wanted to do something a 
little bit different, maybe if I move category up into Filters, you'll see now at the
top I get this little dropdown which is showing me all of categories. And currently I 
still just have the sum of sales. So that's not particularly meaningful.
Although I could if I want to see all of the sales for the 'Accessories' category, 
click on 'OK', like so. But if I wanted to break that down even further, I could maybe
choose to grab the town field, drag that down into rows. 

So, now I'm seeing a list of all of the towns, the total sales, and I can filter by 
specific categories. So, I could say 'All' to see everything. Alternatively, if I was 
just interested in maybe 'Games' and if I want to select multiple, I have a look check 
box at the bottom. I'm interested in 'Games', 'Laptops', and 'Memory Cards'; just the
sales for those three categories, click on 'OK',and my data is going to update. 
So, that is what that little 'Filter' area is up there. I'm going to go in and 
I'm going to say, 'All' and click on 'OK'. I could drag the 'Category' field into 
columns and get my data to display a completely different way. So, now I have
my 'Towns' listed in the rows, my 'Categories' in the columns, and my 'Sum of Sales'
in the middle. And that is a very basic pivot table;
how you create one, and how you can utilize those fields, move them around, pivot 
the data and really get out of the data, the analysis that you require. 

